 Brief Report on “So Bhir” Landslide on 13/08/2016 near the 
Mantam village, North Sikkim - Analysis using Cartosat-2B image 
1. Introduction 
A massive landslide occurred near the village of Mantam  (opposite to the Passin gdang-Mantam 
Road) in Sikkim at around 13:30 hrs (IST) on 13th of August, 2016 (Figure 1). As per the news reports 
formation of the lake and consequent rise in water level submerged the Kanka bridge and washed 
away about 300 metres of road . Five houses in the Mantam village have  been submerged . The 
villages of Tingvong, Lingdem, Laven , Kayeem, Lingzya , Bay , S akyong Pentong and Ruklu K ayeem 
are cut-off due to the damage to the connecting road. There are no human casualties reported from 
the incident. 
 
Figure 1: Photograph of the Mantam landslide (Source: Social media). 
2. Landslide analysis 
The landslide generated a huge cloud of dust engulfing the nearby settlements (Figure 2a). From the 
field photograph it appears that it is a rock av alanche and the dust cloud was formed due to rapid 
downslope movement of dry rockmass resulting in airblast.  The debris from the landslide is believed 
to have blocked the flow of the Kanaka river/Ringpai Chu, which is one of the main tributaries to the 
Teesta River.  
An analysis was carried using very high resolution Cartosat -2B (80 cm) image acquired on 15 August 
2016. The water impoundment has resulted in the formation of artificial lake  of 2.2 km length and 
209 m width at the lake head, north of the Manta m (Figure 2b). The width of the landslide is 530 m 
in the middle and length is 790 m. The landslide is rectangular in shape. The crown of the landslide is 
on the ridge line  (Figure 3) . Debris deposits are clearly observed on either side of the ridge line. 
Joints exposed after the landsliding suggest a wedge type failure near the crown of the landslide 
followed by translational type of failure in the main body of the landslide.  

This area is near to Main Central Thrust (MCT), which takes a convex turn to the north and also has a 
tectonic window known as Rangit window . Due to the presence of MCT, h igh grad e central 
Himalayan crystalline rocks (e.g. quartzites and granite gneisses) exposed in this area were subjected 
to shearing which is evident from the density  of joints in the landslide scarp  region. Area around 
Sakkyong in the upstream part of the Kanka river also witnessed severe landslide occurrences during 
the Sikkim earthquake on 18 September 2011. Groundwater seepages from the exposed joint planes 
are clearly visible in the Cartosa t-2B image.  Therefore, the role of aqui fer induced pore pressure 
(due to earlier monsoon rains)  and escarpment stress condition as evident from the presence of an 
old landslide could be probable causative factors for the landslide occurrence on 13 August 2016. 
The water impoundment may have presented a serious threat to settlements downstream and 
installations like the T eesta Low Dam Project V of NHPC.   However, as seen from the Cartosat 2B 
image, the river water has overtopped the debris  dam and now flowing along its natur al course in 
the form of a turbulent rapid , without any lateral breaching . As a consequence  of this, the lake is 
draining out through the narrow outlet and there is no eminent  water level rise. Nevertheless, it is 
important to monitor the water spread and the volume of the lake over the next few weeks, as a 
sudden even of high rainfall in the upstream areas, can lead to rapid water level rise and 
submergence of the habitations beside the lake. 
 
 
Figure 2a: Dust cloud from the landslide; 2b: Artificial lake formation due to the landslide (Source: 
Social media) 

 
Figure 3. Analysis of Mantam landslide using Cartosat-2B image. 
